# Digital Footprints of the Policing Web
Scripts for doctoral research project, "Digital Footprints of the Policing Web: A Study of Police Criminal Investigations using Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning".

https://utoronto.scholaris.ca/server/api/core/bitstreams/14c42345-fbf5-4b34-98f5-34504797a88c/content

**TABLE OF CONTENTS**

INTRODUCTION

MAPPING THE FIELD OF POLICE ECONOMIC CRIME INVESTIGATION

Abstract: This chapter provides a general overview of the field of police economic crime investigation in Canada, intended in part as a primer for readers that may be unfamiliar with this aspect of the police institution. The chapter begins with a brief, definitional discussion of the concept of economic crime. From here, it turns to the question of how police economic crime investigation units are structured across Canada. Existing literature in policing studies does not provide a comprehensive answer to the question of how police investigations into economic crime in Canada are structurally organized. To fill this gap in the literature, the chapter draws on public records, legislative documents, and official statistics (e.g., Uniform Crime Reporting Survey) to provide a high-level mapping of the field of police economic crime investigation in Canada along three interrelated dimensions: (1) agencies and jurisdiction, (2) legislative powers, and (3) arrest, charging, and prosecutorial outcomes. From this mapping exercise emerge two general observations about the current state of economic crime investigation in Canada and the limits of conventional criminological data forms. First, it is argued the current state of police economic crime investigation units raises questions about four important organizational dimensions: centralization, intermittence, policification, and low visibility. Concerning low visibility specifically, it is argued that systematic difficulties faced by policing scholars attempting to empirically investigate criminal investigations into economic crime -- difficulties compounded by the other three organizational traits -- can be partially remedied by greater adoption of text-as-data methods focused on the analysis of natural language in lieu or alongside of the analysis of more conventional data sources.

INVESTIGATIVE CHALLENGES (CORPUS I - LAW)

Abstract: This study critically investigates representations of police economic crime investigation in Canada using a large, bilingual corpus of case law. Two central questions motivate the study: what kinds of legal and extra-legal challenges do Canadian police detectives face when investigating economic crime, and to what extent do these challenges appear to shape prosecutorial outcomes? The corpus includes data on prosecutions for three economic crime types in three regional jurisdictions over a 20-year period (2001-2021): money laundering prosecutions in British Columbia; capital market crime prosecutions in Ontario; and state-corporate corruption prosecutions in Quebec. Police investigation, let alone police economic crime investigation, is one of the least well studied aspects of modern, democratic policing. This gap in the literature is accounted for in part by the relative difficulty of studying police investigations using traditional qualitative methods such as expert interviewing and participant observation. The lower visibility and greater sensitivity and guardedness of detective work relative routine patrol work make it much less amendable to these and other established methodological techniques commonly used by policing scholars. This study argues that case law, especially with the aid of automated methods of data mining, offers an invaluable yet underused data source for qualitative research into this otherwise difficult to study component of the policing web. To illustrate this approach, this study combines computational techniques of document parsing and dictionary-based information retrieval with techniques of qualitative content analysis to process and analyze a large collection of written judicial decisions stemming from 52 prosecutions published in a mix of English and French. Six major sources of legal and extra-legal challenges faced by police economic crime investigators are identified and discussed in terms of their potential impact on judicial outcomes. These are: investigative necessity, disclosure, resources and/or motivation, information gathering, police deviance, and knowledge work. In conclusion, this study calls on policing researchers to make greater use of case law as a data source, reflects on the broader implications of the study for policing reform and understandings of police strategy and discretion, and proposes a number of avenues for future research.

PUBLIC IMAGES (CORPUS II - MEDIA)

Abstract: This study investigates representations of police economic crime investigation in Canada using a large corpus of news articles. Public images of crime and policing invite careful analysis given the powerful role the media plays in shaping people's perceptions and ideas about social problems and their solutions. The corpus is comprised of national news articles on policing and economic crime in Canada over a 20-year period (2001-2021). Existing research into news media representations of criminal justice suffers from a bias toward street level and violent crimes like drug dealing, petty theft, and homicide, tends to disproportionately focus on representations of victims and offenders rather than policing, and is based primarily on one-off case studies of small data sets, limiting researcher's abilities to conduct large-scale comparative and longitudinal analysis of trends. Blending techniques adopted from the fields of natural language processing and machine learning with qualitative content analysis, this study contributes to literature on crime, law, and media by examining three dimensions of media representations of police economic crime investigation in Canada in nearly 3,000 news articles: newsworthiness, frequency, and framing. Three central questions motivate the study: what kinds of police economic crime investigations do mainstream news publications view as the most newsworthy, how frequently are police economic crime investigations reported on, and how are stories about police economic crime investigations framed? To examine newsworthiness and frequency, the analysis uses a machine learning technique called Structural Topic Modeling to analyze patterns in the kinds of police economic crime investigations the media tends to report on and patterns in the frequency of reporting over time. A qualitative analysis of a subset of articles from the larger corpus provides insight into the framing of media reporting on policing and economic crime in Canada. In conclusion, the study reflects on the broader implications of the findings for future research into the policing of economic crime, the role of the media in shaping public perceptions of policing practices and policy reform, and the promising potential of text-as-data techniques as a means of advancing criminological research.

STATE RESOLUTIONS (CORPUS III - COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY)

Abstract: This study critically investigates representations of police and economic crime in official discourse. I deal with questions about how Canadian governments diagnose weaknesses in the policing of economic crime and weigh different possibilities for reform. Commissions of inquiry are important mechanisms through which liberal democratic states engage experts in the reformulation of law and policy, appease the discontents of outraged publics, and replenish the legitimacy of the state through symbolic rituals of rational dialogue and debate. Commissions of inquiry unfold in two major phases: an investigative phase and a reporting phase. During the investigative phase, oral hearings, affidavits, and other fact-finding devices are used to solicit the expertise of the "lay intelligentsia" \citep{burton2013official}. In the second, information and evidence gleaned from the investigation is transformed into ostensibly impartial, independent, and actionable knowledge published as the commission’s final report. In existing scholarship on commissions of inquiry, it is the second phase – in particular, the contents of the final report – that receives most attention. The knowledge production and diffusion processes through which these reports are produced is insufficiently examined and under-theorized. Analyzing an original big data corpus of every heard testimony considered by a recent high-profile commission of inquiry into money laundering in Canada, this article systematically traces selective patterns of information uptake and translation combining natural language processing and social network analysis techniques to analyze text-as-data. Specifically, I aim to assess the extent to which the Cullen Commission's major conclusion that shortcomings in the policing of economic crime are by and large a problem of lack of resources can be traced back to who the commission consulted as experts and what information they provided. In doing so, the article begins the work of making visible how the "reckoning schemes of legitimation" \citep{ashforth1990reckoning} are constructed from oral hearings at the disposal of commissioners and their staff. Such an approach to the study of commissions of inquiry, it is argued, can help advance a more critical understanding of these longstanding and enduring mechanisms of state power and legitimation.

CONCLUSION

